# Authentication


Password goals:

- authenticate user
- adversary must guess before succeeding
  * guessing is expensive


## Paging vs Password

In an prev-gen OS the password checking was checking each letter one by one and
returning as soon as some letter didn't match.

In a prev-gen OS you could use a trick of laying out the input in the memory in
a way that the prefix is in memory and the rest is swapped to disk (due to
limitations of available memory). If the prefix matched, OS would load the
second page to memory (it takes a lot more time) and this way it will reveal if
the prefix matches. It makes it much easier for the adversary to guess the
password (26*N instead of 26^N).

Lesson: the crypto code should produce as little side-effects as possible.

## Crypto hash (sha-1)

Don't store the plain-text passwords, store the hashes. Use a one-way hash
function. Even if your data is compromised (db compromised or buffer overrun)
the mallory will not get the plain-text passwords.

According to the statistics from the leaked passwords databases, 5000 unique
passwords account for 20% of the 32M records database. So even if your table is
hashed, the mallory still can build a reverse index.

## Salting

In addition to the user, store a different salt for every user. Then the hash
will be the hash of salt concatenated with the password. Now it is difficult to
build up a reverse table based on password popularity.


## Session cookies

It is a good idea to minimize the use of the password to minimize the chances of
compromising it. Instead authenticate once and then provide a temporary
short-lived cookie for the subsequent requests.

    cookie = H(user || expiration || secret)

The secret for the cookie generation is required so only server can generate
them. Otherwise clients will just make up long-lived cookies themselves.

Also be explicit about these hashes. E.g.:

   H('ben' || '22-may-2012') == H('ben2' || '2-may-2012')

... in this case set a delimeter before hashing.



## Challenge-response

Phishing: `bank0famerica.com` instead `bankofamerica.com`.

To prevent this, we set a challenge.

    C -> u -> S
    C <- r <- S
    C -> H(r || password) -> S

So now if the phishing happens, user will send a hash of the challenge with
password. If the phishing server can't generate same challenges, it will not
work.

But what if the phishing server is proxying requests (man-in-the-middle)? If we
are more explicit about who is sending challenge to whom, it will be better:
hash ip of destination server as well (we are trusting the network here).

You can have this challenge-response scheme in opposite direction when the user
logs in, they want to know that the server is legitimate.


## One-time passwords

Server stores `H^n(P)` instead of `H(P)`.

Now user doesn't send the plain password, it sends `H^n-1(P)`. The server checks
it with `H^n(P)` and then rewrites the stored password as `H^n+1(P)`. Has a
limited number of uses.

## Time-based OTP

Client sends `H(time || pw)`. The server checks against last 10 seconds or
similar. That's how 2-factor auth works (android app that generates numbers
independently).



